<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Setting up an Environment</title>
  </head>
<body>

<h1>Setting up an Environment</h1>

<h2>Install</h2>

To run this tutorial, you need to have nevow available to python and
you'll need the files in the doc/howto tree. You don't even have to
install nevow; the examples will run within the source tree.


<h3>Combinator: The Divmod Way</h3>

<p>Using SVN
with <a href="http://divmod.org/trac/wiki/DivmodCombinator">Combinator</a>
is the best way to try out the example code in-place (and hop between
other SVN branches in the future). This is how we develop and test our
applications at Divmod. If you have a system installation of Twisted
that you don't want to update or interfere with, you can use this
method without installing anything.
</p>

<ol>

<li>Create a projects directory or change to some other test directory
of your choice:
<pre class="shell">
$ mkdir ~/Projects
$ cd ~/Projects
</pre>
</li>


<li>If you don't have the
<a href="http://twistedmatrix.com/trac/">twisted library</a>, check it out now:
<pre class="shell">
$ svn co svn://svn.twistedmatrix.com/svn/Twisted/trunk Twisted/trunk
</pre>
</li>

<li>Then get Combinator and Nevow (and the rest of Divmod). See the
<a href="http://divmod.org/trac/wiki/CombinatorTutorial">Combinator
Tutorial</a> for more about these special checkout paths.
<pre class="shell">
$ svn co http://divmod.org/svn/Divmod/trunk Divmod/trunk
</pre>
</li>

<li>Set up the Combinator environment in this shell. You'll need this
step in any future test shells since it adjusts PATH and PYTHONPATH:
<pre class="shell">
$ eval `python Divmod/trunk/Combinator/environment.py`
(some "link:" lines are normal)
</pre>
</li>

<li>Register both the Twisted and Divmod (and thus Nevow+Athena) codebases with
Combinator:
<pre class="shell">
$ chbranch Twisted trunk
$ chbranch Divmod trunk
</pre>
</li>

<li>You can check to see if your environment is ready to go by running the
tutorial tests (from any directory, after executing the previous command):
<pre class="shell">
$ trial nevow.test.test_howtolistings
</pre>
If they all pass, you're ready to begin the tutorial.
</li>
</ol>



<h3>Standard distutils Installation</h3>

<p>If you don't want to manage branches and environments with
Combinator, you can install our code in the
standard <code>site-packages</code> directory. You'll still need the
source tree so you can use the files in doc/howto.</p>

<p>For those that would prefer the <q>old way,</q> here's how you do it:</p>

<ol>

<li>Create a projects directory:
<pre class="shell">
$ mkdir ~/Projects
$ cd ~/Projects
</pre>
</li>

<li>Checkout and install the latest Twisted:
<pre class="shell">
$ svn co svn://svn.twistedmatrix.com/svn/Twisted/trunk Twisted
$ cd Twisted
$ sudo python setup.py install
$ cd ../
</pre>
</li>

<li>Checkout and install Nevow:
<pre class="shell">
$ svn co http://divmod.org/svn/Divmod/trunk/Nevow Nevow
$ cd Nevow
$ sudo python setup.py install
$ cd ../
</pre>
</li>

</ol>

</body>
</html>
