<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Introduction</title>
  </head>
<body>

<h1>Introduction</h1>

<h2>Who is this tutorial for?</h2>

<p>This tutorial is for people who want to build interactive client-server
functionality where a web-browser is the client.  It will show you how to build
a live, interactive chat application that requires nothing more than a web
browser that supports JavaScript.</p>

<p>The interesting thing about a chat application, which shows why Nevow Athena
is special, is that it involves two-way communication.  In other words, it
involves not only the recently-popular AJAX (the web browser sending commands
to the server without loading a new page) but also the trickier and, in our
opinion, somewhat cooler technique known as COMET (the web server
sending commands to the <em>browser</em>).</p>

<h2>Who is this tutorial <em>not</em> for?</h2>

<p>Nevow Athena is <em>not</em> for people who want a normal web application
framework.  If you want one of those, you should use
non-Athena-<a href="http://divmod.org/trac/wiki/DivmodNevow">Nevow</a>,
<a href="http://www.djangoproject.com/">Django</a>,
<a href="http://turbogears.org/">TurboGears</a>, or maybe even
<a href="http://rubyonrails.org/">Ruby On Rails</a>.  Athena doesn't work in terms
of pages, links, or HTTP requests and responses; it is a client-server
framework that works in terms of widgets, JavaScript objects, and symmetric
asynchronous message queues.</p>

<p>However, as alluded to above, Athena is part of a larger framework, Nevow,
which can be used to build more general-purpose and <q>traditional</q>
web applications.</p>

<h2>AJAX</h2>

<p>AJAX isn't a technology in and of itself, bur rather an amalgam of
technologies used together in order to accomplish the goal of making web
applications more responsive than traditional delivery and interactive
mechanisms, such as HTML forms submitted to a server.</p>

<p>In particular, AJAX consists of the following:</p>
<ul>
<li>Asynchronous communications from a user's browser to a server</li>
<li>JavaScript</li>
<li>Exchanged data (usually XML or JSON)</li>
</ul>

<h2>COMET</h2>

<p>Historically, the focus of AJAX technologies was user-event driven. However,
with the need to update the user's browser with events generated at the server,
a solution more sophisticated than AJAX was needed; this has been dubbed COMET.
Athena is implemented using both AJAX and COMET techniques, and therefore
allows two-way browser &lt;-&gt; server communications.</p>

<h2>Athena Basics</h2>

<p>We've provided brief background information on AJAX/COMET, but what is the
purpose of Athena? What makes Athena different than other solutions? Here are a
few key points that should help with these questions::</p>
<ul>
<li>Athena exists to make writing COMET web applications easy.</li>
<li>Athena is written in Python and JavaScript</li>
<li>It is written to be used with Nevow, a <a
href="http://twistedmatrix.com/">Twisted</a>-based web framework.</li>
<li>Similar to Twisted's <a
href="http://twistedmatrix.com/projects/core/documentation/howto/pb-intro.html">Perspective
Broker</a>, Athena employs remote calls.</li>
</ul>

<p>Athena was written by Twisted and Divmod developers (in addition to
contributing members of the community) in order to bring the outdated and
Nevow-incompatible Woven LivePage technology to Nevow. In addition, it was an
opportunity to improve upon the original design and incorporate new features to
address the growing needs of developers.</p>

<h2>Target Applications</h2>

<p>Good candidates for Athena web applications would include those where the
application needs to respond to user input and/or updates from servers, such
as the following:</p>
<ul>
<li>conference software (e.g. whiteboard, shared text, chat, etc.)</li>
<li>mail clients</li>
<li>interactive, multi-player games</li>
<li>social networking tools</li>
<li>office applications (e.g., spreadsheets, word processors, etc.)</li>
</ul>

<h2>Target Developers</h2>

<p>Anyone who wants to create interactive, web-based applications is a
potential Nevow/Athena user. It's best to have some background in writing web
applications, and in addition, to know how to use Nevow. However, we hope that
this tutorial will be just as useful for beginners as experienced
developers.</p>

</body>
</html>
